
/>>


///  Introduction

It is clearly true that an important part of human language is governed by rules or 
structures, ones that can be (at least to a useful extent) formalized and computationally 
simulated.  And yet, language was not designed by committee: upon arguing that a 
particular semantic or syntactic pattern has become entrenched in some context 
(e.g., dialect or sociolect or discursive milieu) an analysis cannot just rest its 
case %-- as if a language is intrinsically a collection of formal rules, and we 
need merely infer them (like reverse-engineering compiled computer code).  The 
question is */why/* patterns become entrenched and stay so.  

Plus, we should not 
overestimate rules' rigidity.  That a bachelor is an unmarried man, for example, 
is a canonical example of logic underlying semantics; but sentences like 
these are quite meaningful:

1) My brother has been married for 10 years, but in many ways he's still a bachelor.
2) All the eligible bachelors in this town are married.

Moral of the story: just as, in a fair legal system, it should be assumed that 
almost all laws have instances where reasonable people would break them, so 
in language, for every "h/rule/" there are contexts where competent 
speakers will ignore them.  

To motivate further discussion about the limits of (and rationales for) linguistic 
formalization, consider these pairs of sentences:

3)  Everyone sang along to three songs
4)  All appeals are heard by a panel of three judges

5)  All New Yorkers live in one of five boroughs
6)  All New Yorkers complain about how long it takes to commute to New York City.

7)  In Ariel's picture of Beatrice, she looks like she has a cold
8)  In Ariel's picture of Beatrice, she snapped the lens just as a mazerati sped by

The situation in 3) and 4) is ambiguity in quantifier scope: assuming 3) discusses some 
music performance, it would be abnormal for everyone in the audience to distinctly choose 
exactly three songs to sing along with.  Hence, we can assume that, among all songs 
played that evening, there were specifically three with the property that (all) the audience 
joined in.  The numeral-quantifier "/three/" is thus outside the scope of "/everyone/": 
"/three songs/" designates just one fixed set, with a static identity vis-a-vis 
all the rest of the sentence (and surrounding context).
   
By contrast, one is free to hear (4) as nesting the scope of "/three/" inside "/All/": it is a 
general principle that three judges hear an appeal, but the set of individuals can vary from one 
appeal to another.  

Another quantifier-related ambiguity that can arise is distinguishing levels of exactitude.  In rhetoric, 
unlike mathematics, "/all/" often actually means "/most/".  The speaker in (6) is not heard to 
report on the attitude of 10+ million residents as if they were personally interviewed (nor would (6) be 
falsified by scatterred counter-examples).  On the other hand, the land area of New York is indeed 
precisely divided into five boroughs, so (5) is */literally/* correct %-- but only via a rigid 
reading of the refential intent behind "/New Yorker/".  Informally, this term could easily be 
applied to anyone who lives in the greater metro area, and regularly visits (or works in) the city proper.

Uncertainties in (7) and (8) are of a different sort: anaphora resolution rather than quantifier-scope.  
They also have two competing interpretations, depending on whether "/she/" is read as Ariel or Beatrice.  The 
former option is more likely in (7) because one can tell from a photograph what the depicted subject 
"looks like".  But we can't */a priori/* exclude a continuation like "x/you'd have to be sick to 
take such a bad shot/".  Nor can we fail to imagine a scenario for (8) where Ariel takes a picture of 
Beatrice photographing a speeding Mazerati.

I chose these sentence-pairs because the variable factor in each case flip-flops from first to second, at least 
in the most */likely/* reading.  But subtle variation can point to the opposite, as in these alternatives 
for (3) and (4):

9)  Every band performed three songs
10)  Everyone in the audience sang along to one song or another

Changing the context to a */band/* playing, versus an audience member, imposes a different interpretive 
framework: usually bands perform a "d/set/" with their own material (or covers).  Meanwhile, switching 
from the exact "/three/" to the more flexible "/one or another/" gives enough construal slack that 
putting the later scope in the former makes interpretive sense.

Despite the competing interpretations, each reading of each sentence I have discussed so 
far, I believe, has a fairly obvious logical form.  But there are other examples where a logical 
gloss would not fully capture the communicated content of a given sentence.  Consider: 

11)  This election is slipping away from the Democrats
12)  Student after student came by to complain about the reading assignments

There is a topic the speaker entertains (a campaign, students' dislike of their homework) but 
intrinsic to the meaning of (11) and (12) is the speaker's epistemic orientation to that 
topic.  The metaphor of "slipping away", precisely because it is a metaphor, connotes a 
gradual process that the speaker has observed from an extended period of time.  Similarly, 
(12) suggests multiple similar episodes that collectively imply a specific 
pattern or phenomenon.  In (12) we are being told more than just "/the students don't like 
my reading assignments/"; the fact that the warrant for that claim (multiple occasions of 
students expressing such displeasure) is presented in language that suggests an extended, 
enduring process expresses a kind of "p/narrative account/" of the speaker's evidential 
rationale.  The details are different than if all objections were made during one 
heated class session, say.  

Any sentence which makes an articulable propositional claim will simultaneously imply 
(or sometimes explicitly describe) the speaker's attitude toward the proposition, 
and rationale for believing thus.  With no further qualification, of course, we 
hear an implicit "y/I believe that/" attached to any utterance.  Since a 
claim of @/P is almost always a claim of "y/I believe @/P/" this kind of 
meta-discursive attitude can be subsumed into ordinary logic, to some extent.  
Often, of course, we present one claim to justify another, as in:

13)  I'm convinced this election is slipping away from the Democrats, because each week 
their polling numbers are getting worse.
14)  I know my class thinks the reading is too hard %-- one student after another has come to tell me so.

So, in short, the pattern of propositions jutifying other propositions does not in itself 
challenge the validity of semantic theories premised on treating sentences as encodings for propositions.

However, the resources a speaker has for expressing the backstory of their 
propositional attitudes span a wide spectrum of connotations and experiences, 
and I'd argue that there is no logical system that could precisely model 
how language-users present details related to how one belief compels 
or reinforces another.  Most discourse embeds propositions not in 
chains of deductive reasoning but rather in narrative presentations 
that reflect the passing of time, the interlocking of situations, and 
in general the somewhat informal and lifeworld-dependent manner in which 
we formulate beliefs and opinions in typical contexts.  To the degree that we 
express beliefs via narrativizing constructions or metaphors like 
"slipping away" and "student after student" %-- or so I claim %-- this 
part of the discourse cannot be adequately captured via logic, but 
rather depends on characterization of the lifeworld processes 
between forming opinions (which are hard to model technically, even 
if we import machinery like fuzzy sets, informal logic, etc.).

Cumulatively, then, I believe that sentences 1-14 offer examples 
of two issues for formal semantics:

1)  While assertion (or implicature) of some proposition @/P is a 
feature of most sentences, there may be details contained in 
the meaning of the sentence that are not contained in @/P itself 
(or in logically related propositions, such as */belief that @/P/*).

2)  Even if the meaning of sentence @/S is indeed to a large extent included in some 
@/P, @/S may not "h/signify/" @/P with the level of context-independence found 
in specialized lexemes.  Instead, speakers infer intent to convey @/P from @/S only 
via background knowledge, and the same string of words could elsewhere encode 
some different proposition.

If these points are valid, then the project of formulating semantics as the search 
for rules governing how sentences @/S encode propositions @/P is notably limited.  

I don't want to make too much out of ambiguity in and of itself.  A "/wooden bat/", 
depending on context, might connote either baseball or sculptures of flying animals.  
Some measure of indeterminacy does not automatically disqualify "/truth conditional 
semantics/" (for example) any more than multiple word-senses do.  
Because "i/dresser/", say, can be either someone donning clothers or a piece of furniture, 
people must discern which is meant, usually with the aid of background knowledge.  
Anyone who believes that such facts problematize a particular semantic theory 
need not progress to */sentence-level/* ambiguity.

However, the */lexical/* underdeterminacy of "/dresser/" or "/bat/"  
is a purely local phenomenon that can't be equated with more holistic 
examples such as (1)-(14).  What's at stake in the latter is that plausible 
reframings of mental construal change our interpretation of each sentence 
from the top down.

To put it differently, it's credible to imagine homonyms like "dresser"  
as surface-level accidents, as if we can avail of a 
lexical "t/deep structure/" by analogy to the syntactic.  
Perhaps lurking behind Ebglish lies an idealized language where senses 
could be marked, so "d/person/" and "d/furniture/" dresser become just 
different words.  The problem on a larger scale is that sentences are supposed to 
function via composition: as words signify concepts, so sentences 
convey propositional content because they merge concepts according 
to specific recipes (syntax matters because multi-concept complexes 
are not just unstructured "t/bags/": the King loves the Queen versus vice-versa).  
I argue from cases like (1)-(14) that even after fully digesting 
compositional intent, predicate signification remains underdetermined.
  
To borrow the apologia from the lexical realm, we'd have to argue that 
lurking behind any actual language is an idealized language which 
"/marks/" all logically salient elements %-- quantifiers, anaphora, deictics 
(imagine marking a proximate versus distal "/there/", or abstract versus concrete 
"/here/"), 
conjunctions (cf. "/and/" as temporal as in "/John quit his job and moved out of town/", 
wherein we hear "/and */then/*/") %-- with enough granularity to forestall 
all compositional ambiguities.  We can imagine some inflectional variation 
on words like "/all/" to distinguish crisp from fuzzy domains, or nested from 
independent quantification; or morphological features on pronouns to 
distinguish verb subjects from objects in anaphoric reference.  But 
should we theorize ideal languages that subsume all such ambiguities 
under fully-determined contracts?

It's my opinion that many writings in linguistics and philosophy 
embrace truth-condition-like paradigms whose central tenets 
may be summarized as follows:

1)  Canonically, sentences signify propositions by analogy to how words signify concepts
2)  Behind any actual language is an idealized language wherein sentences denote 
structured propositions via compositional patterns, themselves encoded through 
syntactic conventions and the semantic properties of specific word-classes 
(quantifiers, pronouns, and so forth).

That is, to the degree that speakers need to employ extralinguistic reasoning, 
those occasions should be treated as individuals mentally bridging the vaguely 
corrupted "/natural/" language to a specular ideal, rather like listeners 
recognizing consistent phonemes despite accent variations.  
It is true, say, that "/Trump/" should be interpreted differently 
when people are playing bridge or talking politics, but this means that 
ambient situations nudge speakers in contextual ways when construing how 
their spoken language should be mapped to its ideal projection.  Context 
disposes us to "/label/" a word like "/Trump/" as either a person or a card 
suit.  But such are antecedent to semantics proper; for theoretical 
purposes we can take the lexicon as enriched with such labels */a priori/*.
The cognitive 
gap between actual and ideal dialects is orthogonal to linguists' 
project, which is to describe rules of the latter.    

My sense that such a paradigm is widespread is admittedly impressionistic, 
and I certainly do not offer it as an expert pronouncement, as if a 
self-appointed State of the Union Address for recent intellectual history.  
It's more that my goal in this paper is to suggest 
an alternative metatheory wherein notions of sentences signifying propositions 
and idealized dialects are at best provisional and emergent.   

No prehistoric King ever instructed his subjects to go create a 
language for expressing truth conditions; even when "i/the meaning of a 
proposition is given by its truth 
conditions/" we have to ask */why/* sentences encode truth conditions (or 
are optimized to do so).  People don't talk out of some abstract desire 
to assert fragments of symbolic logic, but rather to coordinate their joint 
activity.  It's easy to see why logically transparent statements are an 
important part of that, but still, language's ability to convey beliefs 
is an */emergent property/* of human verbal communication.  
The existence of coherent @/S-to-@/P mappings is not an axiom to 
deploy in linguistic explanations, but a cognitive faculty to be explained.

To be clear, I do believe the value of signifying propositions is 
self-evident.  My point is that any instance of @/S conveying @/P 
is not just a linguistic phenomenon, but rather a detail of 
two (or more) persons' social and collaborative interactions.  
If I slip, fall, clutch my ankle, and grimace, someone will 
conclude that I might be injured; but groaning "/ouch/" does not 
express this through linguistic means.  Similarly, if I see a 
car veering dangerously close to my friend John from behind him, shouting 
"/John/" to get his attention does not make that word signify 
"/watch out!/".  In most communication, linguistic structure 
plays a more prominent role %-- only rarely do we convey ideas through vocalization 
alone, untethered from syntax and semantics (and pragmatics) %-- 
yet just because propositions get conveyed 
in a linguistic context does not ensure that */why/* or */how/* this 
happens is fully explainable in linguistic terms.

Instead, sentences 1-14 suggest that the specific @/P derived from an @/S 
depends (in part) on addressee's rational acts that aren't linguistic 
in nature.  The reason why quantifier scope is nested in (4) but not (3) is that 
the predicates signified by that reading make more sense than their 
alternatives, but such judgment relies on knowledge of socio-cultural, not 
linguistic, facts.  In short, whatever a sentence means, it does so 
%-- in the general case %-- not via linguistic structures alone, but 
via the interplay of such structures with more general cognitive 
and social-semiotic processes.  Consequently, linguistic 
explanation alone is incomplete.  Moreover, these issues are sufficiently 
holistic and entrenched that we cannot dismiss them as cognition   
just bridging a gap beween real and ideal language, by analogy to 
real and ideal dictionaries (where each distinct word-sense might 
be marked in some disambiguating manner).  

Granted, for */any/* science */all/* explanation is incomplete.  
Sciences have to work together across scales of phenomena 
and causal inter-dependence.  It is reasonable for a discipline to decide  
what is and is not in its theoretical */raison d'etre/*.  But theories 
should at least itemize the compositional or causative networks 
that relate phenomena in their own scope to those in peer 
theories' purview.  Lexical plurality is one domain where 
linguistics is obviously incomplete, because background knowledge 
is needed to adjudicate competing word-senses.  But I believe 
the */compositional/* indeterminacy of whole sentences 
is qualitatively different, and reveals a more substantial 
surface area where linguistic and extralinguistic 
phenomena inter-penetrate.  While linguists 
should not necessarily pursue technical models of these 
extra-linguistic processes, there's enough interpenetration 
between language and overall intersubjective reality that 
linguistic analysis can at least be attuned to theoretical 
structures for human cognition in general.  Linguistics 
should operate in an intellectual environment where 
overarching theories of cognition and communication 
are formulated and disputed.

For these reasons, I believe */cognitive phenomenology/* is 
relevant to linguistics because it potentially provides this 
overarching theoretical framework.  Here, I will outline 
why I think Hussurlian phenomenology can play this role, 
and then what implications for syntactic theory might follow 
therefrom.


///   Linguistic Foundations: Phenomenology and the Philosophy of Science?



I argue in this section that (Husserlian) phenomenology and the philosophy of 
science can jointly offer a framework for justifying linguistic 
methodology.  On (overly superficial, I believe) interpretations, 
phenomonology is often seen as hostile toward science.  I propose, however, 
that phenonenology's analytic role relative to other humanistic 
disciplines can be usefully discussed in terms of the mutual support 
between interrelated scientific theories.

An intrinsic aspect of any science is establishing a collection of 
entities (or kinds thereof) that comprise its focus.  Apart from 
elementary particle physics (perhaps) such entities will almost 
always be reducible to smaller parts.  Hydrology depends on 
properties of water molecules, and botany on plant cells.  
However, the discourse of the higher-scale disciplines should 
not parrot that of chemistry or cellular biology.  It is the 
responsibility of each higher-scale theory to develop a 
vocabulary and classification that describes dispositions 
and attributes of their higher-scale objects.  Explanations can 
then address why posited dispositions and attributes 
generate observed behaviors.

By analogy, there is a distinct set of terms relevant to 
high-level computer source code: procedures, lexical variables, 
lifetimes, types, pointers, execution branches.  Separately, 
there are terms related to machine code: registers, instruction 
sets, opcodes, memory pages.  Although source files compile 
to machine code, analyses of programming languages' rules and 
implementations cannot in general "h/quantify/" over machine-level 
concepts.  Examining progressively smaller 
physical scales may suffice for purely mechanical explanations of 
physical processes, but remains explanatorily incomplete insofar 
as macro-scale phenomena structure and mold the micro-scale aggregates.  
By analogy, a purely molecular account of the dynamics of a spinning 
baseball does not take into consideration the thought processes 
of the pitcher who decided to throw a curveball.  A complete 
account of the universe in that moment needs to recognize such 
work of mind as part of the causal background for the ball's spin.

In general, causative explanation is incomplete on any one scale in 
particular; it is only by bridging multiple theories that one can 
simultaneously analyze both purely physical properties (dependent 
on micro-scale realities) and aggregate, complex behavior 
(caused by interactions between higher-scale objects).  Individual 
theories contribute to cross-scale explanations by formalizing 
their own terminological and epistemological frameworks, ones 
that focus on some class of entities but also explicate how 
peer theories (e.g., those of smaller constituents) describe 
causal grounds for the dispositions and attributes studied by 
the original theory.  This is intrinsic to any science: hydrology 
and botany (reusing those examples) exist as such because it 
is possible to negotiate discursive practices and investigatory paradigms 
for macro-scale complexes of water (rivers, oceans, lakes, dams) 
and */Plantae/* organisms (trees, forests, foliage ecosystems, etc.) respectively, all the 
while connecting such paradigms to theories of smaller constituents 
(water molecules and plant cells).

The situation is similar with respect to humanities and social sciences.  
A political theorist might note the waxing and waning of parties' popularity,
but such phenomena ultimately rest on individual voters' decisions.  
The mindset of a single person acts as a societal "t/reductive base/" 
(likewise for economics and the individual worker/consumer).  Such brings 
one naturally to cognition, which is an inevitable explanatory 
setting for any talk of decision-making or ideology.

Abstractly, of course, cognition exists in the mind.  But human brains 
have billions of neurons; the contrast in scale is closer to a water molecule 
within a large lake than to a line of computer code, compiling down to 
perhaps ten or twenty machine-language instructions.  Inter-theory 
reduction depends on filling macro-to-microscale gaps with mid-level  
analyses; source files, for example, become transformed to several 
intermediate representations during a compiler pipeline.  Vis-a-vis the 
human mind, neurologists certainly understand how clusters of neurons 
form "t/nuclei/" or "t/ganglia/" with distinct functional roles; and, 
on a higher scale, brain scientists identify many distinct 
(and functionally unique) anatomic regions.  Working from 
"h/the ground up/", however, one is still far from connecting 
neurophysical substrata to observed patterns in human cognition.

There is an almost universally recognized explanatory gap with respect 
to consciousness itself: we still have little understanding of 
how purely biological phenomena can give rise to subjective 
"t/first-personal/" states and awareness.  Some philosophers 
apparently minimize this gap by construing consciousness as epiphenomenal, 
ontologically separated from the primary functional structures 
of cognition.  However, the nature of consciousness */per se/* clearly 
plays a critical role in the mental careers of conscious animals.  
Consciousness evolved at some point in natural history, and presumably 
it conferred adaptative benefits.  Modern humans have retained 
"/fight or flight/" reflexes for very specific circumstances, 
but many people will experience only a handful of occasions 
during a lifetime wherein their actions are not guided 
by deliberate conscious control.  Instead of reacting to stimuli 
merely via instinct, forming conscious mental representations 
%-- ones allowing a certain distance between observer and 
observed, so that an animal may rationally assess situations %--  
evidently permits a wider and more malleable repertoire 
of responses.  

Over the course of time, in short, animal behavior and intelligence 
evolved in consort with consciousness such that, for humans at least, 
subjective experience is the intrinsic medium through which 
much of our rational activity happens.  We exist in a world 
of conscious representations that allow us to observe 
surrounding environments without immediately acting; we benefit 
from the chance to formulate reactions thoughtfully, informed 
by values, personal identity, and past experience.

Suppose I stand by a platform waiting for a subway to arrive.  I need to board 
the correct train.  To do so, I may well follow a well-rehearsed 
protocol that might begin with hearing the train before seeing it: 
this cues me to look down the platform in its direction.  Upon seeing 
its outline I would then focus attention on the letter- and color-coded 
symbol painted on the front, which I then decifer to check whether 
this is the correct train, before stepping back to allow passengers 
to disembark.  Each step in this process is consciously mediated %-- 
I need to deliberately shift my perceptual orientation multiple 
times.  I could choose to break off the "t/protocol/" given some external 
stimuli.  Perhaps I hear my cell phone pinging.  Or, there's an announcement 
that the current train is out of service, so it's a moot point.  The key 
detail is that such protocols don't just occur by instinct.  They continue, 
or not, because of subjectively controllable choices of cognitive orientation. 

Not that we have first-person awareness of all cognitive 
processes.  Concious reality has many constituents 
that we experience as perceptual givens even as the product of 
complex (subconscious) reasoning.  We see a world of discrete objects, 
whose contours and boundaries are inferred via visual processing.  
Sight employs color variation to partition visual scenes, but 
it is not as simple as isolating distinct color patches.  Given a 
red rose in a blue vase, we cannot segment the image merely by 
treating red as the flower and blue as the pottery.  
Color-perception has added complexity first because some chromatic 
variation is expected in an extended region due to texture 
and lighting; and second because visible substances have 
optical qualities beyond just red/green/blue quantities 
%-- albedo, specularity, glossiness, metallicity, opaqueness, etc. 
(potentially modeled as distinct 
channels alongside RGB).  Object boundaries are 
suggested by discontinuities in visual properties of 
variying kinds, not just pure color; moreover, segmentation 
algorithms have to be cautious of spurious boundaries 
due to light/shadow effects and the vagaries of pigmentation.  

Humans subconsciously perform complex image-analysis tasks, many 
of which can be simulated by computer-vision algorithms: 
texture segmentation, 3D reconstruction, occlusion compensation 
(e.g., perceiving the shape of a vase's back side by projecting 
around from its visible rim-circle).  Via color alone we 
infer textural and optical details, yielding a significantly 
enlarged color space, and thereby perceive objects' external 
geometry (e.g., their gradient vectors at each point 
%-- the degree to which their shape departs from a flat plane).  
We do not consciously */direct/* these processes, by contrast to 
my example of ascertaining which train is arriving.  Nevertheless, 
conscious experience is intrinsically structured by 
faculties of visual (and, to some extent, haptic/tactile) 
perception so that we can trust our senses as a usually 
reliable source of information about objects' movement, 
position, shape, and contours.  We */do/* exercise deliberate 
control over such data by conscious choices of where to 
direct attention.

Presumably this balance between conscious and subconscious 
cognition is a fine equipoise, evolved to optimize the 
efficacy of conscious control.  But even if perceptual 
processes such as textural segmentation, occlusion compensation, 
and gradient recognition are not guided by conscious 
intervention, it is only */through/* consciousness 
that such gestalts factor in to larger-scale 
human actions.  The human mind works in such a manner  
that pre-conscious operations become consequential  
as they are woven into conscious experience, 
against which we orient as perceiver to perceived, 
while also superimposing planning and executive 
control, situational awareness, personal identity, 
and our overall commitment to engage the world 
in rational, purposeful ways.  Consciousness 
is a necessary medium through which the 
"t/outputs/" of cognitive processes acquire the status 
of perceptual givens, that we deem to disclose  
external states of affairs, relative to which we coordinate actions.

Any comprehensive theory of human cognition, then, is necessarily a 
theory of how subjective experience serves as a unifying 
field for variegated preconscious faculties, and a 
kind of sounding board connecting momentary 
perceptions to larger-scale goal-directed action and 
situational reasoning.  Consequently, investigations 
that abstract away an encompassing first-personal context 
are only provisional %-- the causal efficacy of a single 
nerve cell, neuronal cluster, brain region, or 
functional algorithm replicated via AI, depends on 
how such entities or processes become manifest in 
consciousness.  Biologists notice a similar contrast 
between */in vitro/* and */in vivo/*: molecular 
interactions (proteins, etc.) in a test tube versus 
in living organisms.  Lab experiments can produce useful 
insights, but are simplifying abstractions.  I propose 
the analogy: consciousness is the */in vivo/* of human 
reality, in that any biological or sociological/economic 
principles invoked to explain human actions are not explantorily 
complete until we consider their presence in 
first-person consciousness.
  
The */in vivo/* realm, to be sure, raises metascientific 
questions.  We cannot dissect, nor neuroimage, an animal going 
about their day-to-day life; the */in vitro/* is artificially 
staged to facilitate data acquisition.  Insofar as 
consciousness is the humanities' */in vivo/*, we similarly 
cannot observe another's mental states as objective givens.  
This is a well-known philosophical controversy.  Phenomenology 
offer techniques to adjudicate claims about cognition 
*/in consciousness/*, compensating for the private nature 
of any one person's experience.  In particular, while introspective 
consideration of mental states */as they occur/* is imperfect 
(analysis alters the analyzed), we do have capabilities to 
reflect on subjective episodes retroactively.  This is not 
an artificial exercise: our minds are primed to learn 
from experience, and also to make inferences about others' 
mental states.  As such, noticing patterns related to 
our own cognition %-- as well as presumptive thoughts 
entertained by people around us (e.g., children noting 
when others appear to act as if they are aware of some 
fact versus when not, as their understanding of 
perspective and inference deepens) %-- is a familiar 
intellectual activity.  Usually this may occur 
without explicit systematization, perhaps to some 
extent subconsciously, but it is not a great leap 
to reflect on past experience with a more 
analytic/expository intent.

Suppose I hold a colorful glass paperweight, maybe some 
four centimeters in diameter.  I will most likely shift my 
visual focus from place to place a couple times, even when holding the 
weight still, to discern the full color patterns on its visible 
side.  Then I might turn it over.  Perhaps, from touch, I infer that 
the bottom side has a flattened base, which I now confirm visually 
while rotating the object manually.  As I just begin that action I 
have some anticipation of the obverse side's appearance, which (let's 
say) is borne out by what I see next.  So a proto-image of that 
hidden side is protained while the top is visible, and when the 
bottom is visible instead my perception of the top is retained. 
The interplay of protention and retention creates a 
perceptual synthesis.  Validation of protentive expectations 
plays a logical role in such synthesis, as would sense-data 
that deviate from anticipated %-- if, say, the paperweight 
had a plastic or cloth covering on its base, while I 
presumed it were all glass.  Our ability to both formulate 
perceptual expectations and adjust to subsequent sense-data 
gives a rational structure to the minimal exploratory 
patterns of sense-perception.

Via discussions such as these we can collectively analyze 
phenomena such as retention, protention, and perceptual 
synthesis.  However, note that empirical actuality 
is not required, nor even particularly relevant, for the 
analysis.  I am not literally holding a paperweight while 
writing these paragraphs, and a paperweight does not 
ship with this paper for experimentation.  I assume that 
both myself and any reader can engage in such hypothetical 
considerations, and two people may either agree or question 
each other's use of terms and concepts such as 
protention and retention.  This gives the analysis 
a public-discursive face.

Meanwhile, none of that dialectic is grounded in empirical 
science as normally understood.  We aren't using 
EKG machines or other brain-scans to measure neuron activity 
while anyone examines a paperweight.  There may or 
may not be identifiable neurological correlates to the 
conecepts of (e.g.) protention and retention.  
Searching for such correlates would be a valid investigation 
bridging the (metaphorical) "/in vivo/" and "/in vitro/" 
facets of human minds.  But as a high-level science, 
cognitive phenomenology does not need to develop a 
complete theory about how the parameters in its 
explanatory arsenal emerge from physical substrata.  
It's goal, rather, should be to work toward 
consensus about which theoretical ideas and 
posits have analytic value and, among such 
foregrounded concepts, strive for consistency 
in theory-semantics and how analytic parameters are 
structurally employed for argumentation.    
     
Phenomenologists from Husserl onward have built a 
literature of analyses and nomenclature toward such 
theoretical ends.  Phenomenological 
"t/reduction/" is particularly intuitive in  
relation to perceptual experience (as compared to 
abstract conceptualization) and how minimal sensate 
givens are contextualized in situations and subjective 
tableaux.  Apperceptive synthesis, in particular, 
occurs on multiple time scales, with any momentary perception 
connected to immediate past and future instants via 
retention and protention.  We cannot really posit 
consciousness within single moments in time; the 
minimal units of experience, evidently, are brief 
but extended perceptual episodes (one or several 
seconds' duration, say).  Such episodes then aggregate into 
larger units whose inner boundaries, we might propose, 
are defined by deliberate acts of perceptual reorientation 
(as in the example of switching from watching for an 
arriving train to focusing toward its window decal).  And such 
compound episodes chain together into purposeful, situational 
action, together with the observations and 
conceptualizations that sustain it.

We therefore have a provisional network of theoretical 
concepts %-- qualia, proprioception, protention, retention, synthesis, 
episodicity, situationality, purposefulness, intentionality 
%-- that help organize discussion about conscious states 
and attitudes.  In other words, phenomenology
does not restrict itself to sensory introspections 
like "e/this shade of red looks identical to that one/"; 
instead, we can reflect on our own experiences to 
consider how concepts such as intentionality and 
episodicity form building blocks of rigorous 
cognitive models.  

Ultimately, we might posit a reductive stack leading from 
high-level, conscious cognition %-- situations, multi-part 
perceptual episodes, singular perceptions %-- down to 
brain regions, neuronal complexes, and individual nerve 
cells.  Like many inter-theory reductions, there may be 
an aura of mystery about the middle stages of this diagram; 
perhaps amplified here by the ontological contrast between
conscious states, on the one hand, and physical cells, 
on the other.  But the metaphysical controversies 
surrounding subjective states should not preclude 
a discursive rationality or disputational metatheory for collectively 
assessing claims about cognitive-subjective 
structuration, even if the warranting data for 
any one such claim are not publicly observable.  
My argument is that by systematizing a methodology 
for analysis of cognition "/in-consciousness/" 
%-- by analogy to "/in vivo/" versus "/in vitro/" 
%-- phenomenology thereby establishes methodological 
prototypes for humanistic and social sciences in 
general, at least for that part of their 
domains where issues of human thought and decision-making 
are relevant.  Phenomenological terminology is 
central to such goals; its mode of analysis is not 
open-ended, but grounded on the deployment of 
specific ideas with relatively fixed technical 
meanings.  Via this sense of discursive "t/practice/" I 
will argue for connections between phenomenology 
and cognitive linguistics.

// // 

Similar to the controversial status of first-person reports 
vis-a-vis theoretical confirmability/falsifiability, the 
linguistics community is divided over the value of 
analyses based on subjective assessments of acceptability.  
It is, of course, common for linguists of many persuasions 
to construct ad-hoc sentences/utterances in service 
of theoretical claims.  Such methods 
raise two questions: whether samples not taken from 
real-life corpora are empirically valid, and whether a 
language-user can simply rely on their own judgment 
(rather than conducting some survey) as determintive, 
as to whether a sentence is meaningful or grammatical.  

There are many analogies, I find, between the epistemic 
relevance of subjective accounts in linguistics 
and in phenomenology.  Both disciplines 
have well-rehearsed protocols even while normal 
empirical disputation relative to publically-accessible data 
does not apply.  The possibility of one writer assenting 
or objecting to another's formulation implies that 
claims largely endorsed by a discource community 
serves witness to their theoretical value %-- no 
less than claims warranted by more empirical measures.

In one discussion that elucidates metascientific 
background for syntactic theory, Hubert Kowelewski 
presents the work of Ronald Langacker, and by extension 
Cognitive Grammar overall, in terms of "/Structural Empiricism/":

Viewed through the lens of structural empiricism, Cognitive Grammar
is therefore a family of models of a linguistic system.  Like any other scientific theory, 
it features theoretical entities and processes (cognitive domains,
constructional schemas, compositional paths, subjectification, etc.) 
and empirical substructures isomorphic (in a weaker version: similar) to appearances
of observable phenomena. (p. 7)

He immediately avows "c/It is somewhat unclear what should count as observable phenomena in 
linguistics/", but situates such uncertainty in a larger philosophical context.  
In particular, */most*/ scientific theories entertain taxonomies and analyses of 
a domain of entities encompassing both public observables and "t/hypothesized/" 
posits that %-- for one of several possible reasons %-- cannot be "h/seen/".  
Empiricism is */structural/* insofar as such "t/unobservables/" can be 
taken seriously because they contribute to persuasive explanations 
of */observables'/* behavior, with structural models unifying the seen 
and the hidden into a rational package.  Sometimes unseen posits are 
deemed just as real as everything else, merely beyond our capabilities 
of (instrument-enhanced) observation, at least for now.  Other phenomena 
(like "t/dark energy/") are left more open-ended, possibly subsumed under 
such ontological realism or possibly artifacts of some more complex process 
(like "t/phonons/", which behave like "i/particles/" of sound, but 
that's largely a metaphor).  Natural selection or "t/design/" would not be an 
object, but rather an encompassing system wherein adaptation drives 
evolution.  Potentially "t/dark/" matter and energy will ultimately 
be given a similarly indirect and holistic cosmological interpretation, 
rather than deemed to refer to a specific kind of field or particle.  

The status of mental attidues and subjectivity vis-a-vis physics and material 
science is more circuitous than these other more-physical "t/unobservables/", 
but Kowaleski implies that we should treat the cognitive as adjunct to the 
physical in a similar structural vein: if explanations quantifying 
over subjective states provide convincing accounts of observed 
behavior (in this case, linguistic performance), then the first-personal 
realm should be judged scientifically legitimate as a kind of "t/hidden variables/" 
dimension.  Specifically in regard to ad-hoc sentence examples, he argues as follows:

The linguistic material analyzed in many ... texts [are] constructed 
... to illustrate points under analysis.  
For this reason, the analyses can be easily attacked on the grounds that
they are somehow unreliable due to the inauthenticity of data. ... 
Many linguists seem to embrace the conviction that linguistics should
study only actual, real-life events of language use, which do not belong anywhere on the above 
counterfactuality scale [viz., logical impossibility is much stronger 
than the contingent fact of something not having yet occurred, with 
various intermediates].  However, this conviction overlooks the fact 
that many useful scientific models involve clearly counterfactual scenarios 
[whose] role is not merely heuristic or pedagogical.

He continues:

The use of fictional models in natural sciences can be accounted for in
philosophical terms.  In the framework of structural empiricism, isolated
systems, frictionless pendulums, and perfect liquids are treated just like
any other theoretical objects, except their theoreticity does not follow from
unobservability, as is the case with electrons and electromagnetic fields, but
from their fictional character.  Since a structural empiricist is not 
committed to believing in the actual existence of real-world objects corresponding
to theoretical concepts, but only to the empirical adequacy of the theory
featuring these concepts, the structural empiricist may accept the theory
while withholding belief in the actual real-world existence of the objects
postulated by the theory.  An idealized model may serve as a tool for predicting observable 
phenomena when predictions derived from the model are
adjusted with respect to the factors omitted in the idealization.

A reasonable paraphrase vis-a-vis constructed sentences is that, for purposes 
of expositing semantic or syntactic claims, the universe of linguistic 
objects is broader than merely the totality of sentences humans have in 
fact created.  Ad-hoc hypotheticals also belong to that 
domain if they belong to regimes for idealized model-building.

I personally would put it thus: what makes a sentence an object in the 
domain of entities spotlighted by linguistics is not necessarily the 
fact of its being empirically an example of real language-use, but 
rather because upon that sentence we can apply observations, analyses, 
annotations, and so forth whose ordinary ground is real-world 
sentences %-- we can, for instance, note syntactic, morphological, or lexical patterns, 
and point out where pragmatic interpretation is needed.  In terms of formal 
syntax, any sentence %-- hypothetical or real %-- belongs fully to the English 
universe if the quetion of whether that sentence conforms to conventional 
English grammar can be answered in the affirmative, negative, or something 
in between.  By analogy, complex numbers are not mathematical objects 
because they have real-world interpretation (as spatial distance, say), but 
because we can apply quantitative techniques to them (addition, multiplication, 
exponentiation, differentiation, integration, infinite series/sums/products, etc.).  
Given a sentence, we can write down each word's part of 
speech; track pronoun-antecedent pairings and singular or plural alignment; observe 
how inflections indicate verb-tense; and etc.: minimal operations in the 
syntactic and semantic realms analogous to addition and vector or scalar 
multiplication in the quantitative.  Such operations apply equally 
whether samples are real or hypothetical.

My earlier subway-platform speculation was similarly about hypothetical 
circumstances.  I have caught New York subways in real life, 
but that's beside the point: we are primed to learn from experience, 
but in a manner that abstracts nonsalient details.  So, vividly memorializing 
past experience is actually a deviation from ordinary rationality.  With respect 
to the intellectual processes involved in learning from experience, 
distilling patterns from */hypothetical/* scenarios is arguably 
more realistic than introspective reconstructions of real ones.  
Husserl, too, builds many analyses around constructed situations %-- 
a mannequin in a shop window, our perceptual synthesis of a sphere.

More to the point, my presentation was not free-associative: via posits 
like attention, episodicity, and situationality I bore a matrix of 
concepts via which to, in effect, "t/annotate/" elements of consciousness.  
Instead of focusing on the contrast between real and hypothetical 
experiences, methodology should consider whether some target of 
analysis is amenable to the notions and structures comprising an 
analytic protocol.  Such framing is probably not structural */empiricism/* 
a la Kowalewski, but there is a similar emphasis on structural 
model building.  A hypothetical object, space, or situation becomes 
an instance of a theoretical model via structural adequacy, and might 
clarify structural hypotheses, or their rationale, better than 
real-world examples.  To put it differently, the proper explanatory 
domain of a theory is any structure that can be analyzed 
according to the terms of that theory %-- including artifacts 
conjured ad-hoc precisely to test, clarify, or refine the theory.
By analogy, again, complex numbers, despite  
lacking physical interpretations, are 
better models than reals, in some respects, for a certain kind of 
mathematical reasoning (e.g., every polynomial has complex roots).

It seems to me that the status of constructed examples in linguistics 
and phenomenology, respectively, are similar, and the "t/demarcation problem/" 
%-- defending linguistics as a legitimate science, not pseudoscience 
(astrology, say) %-- plays similarly in both contexts.  There is 
a more acute version of that problem once we accept hypothetical 
case-studies as a foundation of argumentation; scientists might 
accept corpus analysis, or the measurable 
performance of AI agents designed according to computational linguistics principles, 
or (respectively) quantitative experimental psychology, but dismiss 
aritificial sentences or "c/just so/" phenomenology as quackery.  
But "r/structural model building/" as an apologia, I'd say, works similarly 
too: via Cognitive Grammar we have a repertoire of concepts 
(landmark, projector, profiling, speaker epistemics) modeled 
within constructed sentences no less than real ones.

Suppose I want to examine a pair of hypothetical examples like:

(1)  John poured water onto the stove.
(2)  John spilled water onto the stove.

The most obvious point would be how "poured" versus "spilled" frame the 
action in different ways (deliberate or accidental).  By selecting 
one or the other, the speaker implictly expresses beliefs about 
John's mental state.  So, choice of words can encode 
information about the speaker's epistemic starting-point; the 
sentence is not merely notating observable details.  

But let's step back.  For sake of discussion, I will assume (1) and (2) 
occur in contexts where listeners know the speaker saw John firsthand 
(the evidence is direct observation, not hearsay).  Implicit 
in a communicative claim to */describe/* something witnessed 
is having been in a perceptual orientation to */see/* it.  The 
sentences then encode salient features of this orientation: 
presumably the speaker was standing/sitting in a position 
where both John and the stove were in their visual frame, 
and they could focus attention on one or the other as 
called for.  Likewise, probably they were talking to 
John or in some other way clued in to the ambient situation, so 
as to rationally infer John's intentions.  Much of the 
*/configuration/* of this cognitive-perceptual orientation, 
thereby summarized, reflects my sketched "t/structural model/" 
for phenomenological description: the intentional relations toward 
objects insofar as we deliberately orient toward them 
as a focus of attention; the coexistence of multiple 
attentional sites (e.g., John and the stove) with focus 
shifting back and forth in larger synthesizing episodes; 
the role of larger-scale situational awareness guiding 
our granular decisions to direct attention hither and thither.

And yet, such configurations are also implicit in the 
sentences' meanings.  Foci of attention tend to become 
signified as nouns; so in both cases we have "John" and 
"the stove".  It is John who initiates the action that 
affects the stove's state, so the former becomes encoded 
as subject and the latter as object.  Since speakers 
implicitly expresses the evidence for propositions 
stated (or implied) in their discourse, understanding a 
sentence is partly a matter of inferring mental states, 
which includes perceptual comportment toward 
its noun-topics.  Anyone hearing (1) and (2) will, 
at least in some schematic manner, reconstruct a 
configuration of attentional focus and situational 
construal that I tried to explicate "h/phenomenologically/".
Syntactic categories like nouns and verbs are 
rooted in listeners' need to infer speaker's cognitive states.

Notice that communication leaves some intersubjective 
slack: our reconstruction of fellows' mental 
world is only provisional.  As a feature of our 
reason and lifeworld, that is, mental states exist 
in a vivid way in our own momentary consciousness, 
but they also exist in an approximative manner 
vis-a-vis people (and often animals) around us.  
Others' cognitions being, modulo such imprecision, 
a natural feature of our own rationality undergirds 
%-- so I claim %-- the feasibility of both 
phenomenological and linguistic analysis.

Listeners inferring speakers' unstated beliefs, 
and perceptual orientations, does not involve 
extrasensory powers but rather deployment of a 
strutural model for how people comport themselves 
to situations so as to observe and act rationally.  
Because language-use is a crucial factor in our 
purposeful action, we seamlessly transition 
from nonverbal orientation toward surrounding 
environments to framings of states of affairs 
in communicable ways, then actual speech-production.  
Basic organizational principles migrate from one to 
the other, such that cognitive-perceptual structures 
(attentional foci, say) become manifest, 
within communicative intent and staging, as 
linguistic phenomena (e.g., that to which 
I can perceptually attend becomes a noun).

If this is correct, then posits of linguistic argumentation 
have origins in cognitive faculties that can be 
phenomenologically investigated (and should be if we 
want an encompassing, "/in vivo/" theory).  At the 
same time, language elucidates  
how models of other minds are inherent to our 
rational agency; they aren't esoteric superstitions 
of a phenomenological sect.  Language is the 
best case-study for how phenomenology simply 
codifies "t/folk theories/" of mind and cognition.  

Phenomenology and cognitive linguistics, then, to 
my mind reinforce each other; and each can be said 
to depend on the other, from an expository 
and justificatory point of view.  

As much as () and () are hyptothetical */sentences/*, the 
imagined contexts %-- the speaker in the kitchen with 
John %-- are hypothetical occurances in a cognitive-science 
framework.  My discussion just now focused 
on the inevitable arising of linguistic orientation from 
perceptual/epistemic co-ordination; structures of 
discourse are not imposed by executive fiat but codify 
innate mechanisms for interpreting others' mental states.  
Analysis of this proposal can be performed via constructed examples, 
such as here, no less than samples taken from recorded corpora.  



(Contrast my defense with Kowalewski's study of the 
Langacker sentence(s) "//").


// //

Given how these sections has progressed, I should at this point 
clarify how a paradigm focused on the interdependence 
of linguistics and phenomenology yields */different/* conclusions 
than a "t/truth-conditional/" semantics about sentences signifying 
propositions.  My gloss of such "t/truth conditions/", again: sentences encode 
propositions */much like/* words encode concepts.  
And %-- on this paradigm %-- they can do so because sentences are not 
an undifferentiated conceptual melting pot: propositional content 
is governed by concepts aggregating in specific 
ways, and in a given order, denoted by syntactic form.  
Right now I will argue in brief terms for theories which 
overlap with this "t/truth-conditional/" approach in some 
areas, but object to the approach in noticeable ways.

For me, this approach is particularly well illustrated by 
a theory presented in Bolt `etal; [], which largely 
aligns with Combinatory Categorial Grammar, but also 
employs a notion of "t/categories/" in the mathematical 
sense of Category Theory (the overarching goal is a 
form of Natural Language Processing suitable for quantum 
computers).  Bolt `etal; propose a semantics 
based on Peter `Gardenfors;'s "t/Conceptual 
Space Theory/", which models interactions between 
concepts as a mutual refinement of high-dimensional 
(or perhaps just metaphorical) spaces.  For instance, 
"/red box/" represents how a conceptual region "/red/" 
narrows the scope of its partnered "/box/", and vice-versa.
In jargon, such transformations would be "t/morphisms/" 
(maps */in/* a Category) whereas there exist 
"t/functors/" */from/* a Category of grammatical 
structures (whose primitive operations, for example, 
might be left or right adjacency) to a Category 
of Conceptual Spaces.  The meaning of a 
singe word is a concept within the latter Category.  
The meaning of a phrase then becomes a kind of 
commutative diagram where connections on the 
grammatical plane become mirrored by syntheses 
within conceptual spaces. 

I am not convinced of the explanatory value of 
quasi-mathematical treatments of concepts, such as 
advanced by Gardenfors (such criteria as "t/convexivity/" 
feel forced to me, outside special contexts like color terms).  
Nonetheless, Bolt `etal; codify what a formal treatment 
of semantics and syntax should look for: having determined 
a pattern of synthesis within linguistic components by 
virtue of syntax, we seek a translation of that 
synthesis into the conceptual register.  Bolt `etal; imply 
that Conceptual Spaces are sufficiently formalizable that 
conceptual aggregation follows from grammatical more or 
less mechanically, not unlike struturally 
similar Categories in mathematics (e.g., real numbers 
and spatial vectors).  Simply calling Conceptual 
Spaces a "t/Category/" might be circular %-- assuming 
what should rather be explained %-- but this methodology 
does focus our attention on the issue of conceptual synthesis.

Alongside Combinatory Categorial Grammar (CCG) is a tradition of 
type-theoretic semantics, which has seemingly similar 
foundations except for abstracting left and right word 
adjacency into a general pattern of one word modifying 
another.  It is argued that Parts of Speech may
be likened to a system of types, such as nouns and 
propositions.  In type theory, mappings from a tuple 
of types to some result type are themselves a type, 
such that one can build an arbitrarily large system 
out of just a few basic types, like noun/proposition 
%-- verbs map nouns to propositions, adjectives map nouns 
to nouns, etc.  In CCG "/categories/" (a different usage 
than Category Theory) 
play a similar role, albeit with more attention to word order. 
In both contexts, nouns are treated as foundational 
constituents and propositions as the over-arching 
sentential type (or category), with phrases 
having intermediate types.  A sentence is properly 
formed if those intermediates resolve to propositionality, 
via type-inference rules such reading (intransitive) verb-noun 
pairs as producing propositions (which may be nested into larger 
sentences via a word such as "/that/", which in its pronoun 
form effectively transforms a proposition into an adjective).  
Computer languages have a similar notion of "/type-checking/" 
to ensure that procedures' parameter-types are consistent 
with their requisite output type, if complex expressions 
are to be evaluable (the check fails if no mapping of 
function-symbols to known procedures is consistent with 
the range of types that may be presented to an enclosing 
expression, and so on iteratively).  

All of these paradigms assume that phrases compose 
meanings by synthesizing concepts in order-dependent 
ways, so it is important to examine how pairs of 
concepts can transform into something more specific 
then either one in particular.  I will outline a 
cognitive-phenomenological reading of this phenomenon.  

??As well as a theoretical starting-point, I intend for this 
discussion to implicitly critique paradigms for which 
the cognitive foundations may be marginalized.

// ///

It is circular just 
to say that "/red box/" means something possessing 
both redness and boxness, so we need to look a 
little deeper.  Consider a full sentence:

()  I put Mom's chocolate brownies in this red tin box, take some!

It's easy to break this down into a synthesis of concepts where 
each word has a distinct contribution.  Here are a few: 

)  tin box ->  provides insight into how the box will look, and 
feel to the touch, as well as how it should be opened

)  red tin box ->  the color helps one find it amidst other objects

)  this red tin box ->  invites the hearer to focus on something proximate 
to the speaker; deictic augments descriptive reference 

)  in this red tin box ->  draws attention to the interior, with its functional 
affordance of holding and storing contents

)  chocolate brownies ->  adds detail possibly relevant to whether the 
hearer will want to eat them (more inviting than "/brownies/" alone) 

)  Mom's chocolate brownies ->  suggests that she made them, and 
this fact is known to the listener.  On an alternative interpretation, 
the brownies are */for/* Mom, but this is less likely given the rest of the sentence.


We should examine both syntactic and semantic factors.  
Semantically, clearly each word adds its own 
details to an emerging picture of the speaker's intent.  
How to properly model the intermediate stages 
of the overall conceptual synthesis remains an open 
question.  Syntactically, it should be obvious that 
there is a fixed order to when each word "h/enters the stage/", 
as it were.  This is presumably enforced by, or an effect of, 
grammatic form, though again a theory would have to 
describe how this happens.

Addressing the semantic plane first, considering words with 
explicit sensation-related meaning is a good place to start.  
It's simple to note that "/red box/" designates a box which 
appears as red.  But we should investigate how this 
meaning actually factors into cognitive processing.  I would 
question an analysis whereby understanding () entails forming a 
mental image of a "/red tin box/", at least with any 
vividness.  But nor do we make sense of that phrase in 
complete isolation from sense-content, I'd argue, in contrast 
to statements about more ethereal matters.  This is a good 
place to invoke the maxim that meanings are usually precursors 
to concrete actions.  Should ()'s hearer decide to partake in 
brownies, the meaning-content helps prep for finding them, 
etc.  "/Red tin box/" thereby equips said hearer with 
information relevant to locating, opening, and reaching inside the box.  
Hearer does not need to form an explicit mental image at the moment 
(of enunciation), but */does/* need to later isolate the box from 
a field of sense-data.  Of course, in imagining that future scenarion, 
hearer might potentially form a certain mental picture of a red tin box, 
but it can adequately be imprecise.

Taking this case as an example, it seems as if phrases 
with concrete, sense-related meanings occupy some intermediate 
cognitive realm, neither abstract concept-clusters nor 
photorealistic imaginary pictures.  This presumably reflects 
cognitive anticipation of future behavior more generally: mentally 
rehearsing planned actions (getting on a subway, introducing ourselves 
to a friend of a friend, etc.) involves pictorial imagination to 
some degree, but we focus on enactive schema more than sensory 
details (maybe a temporal mirror-image of how perceptual 
specifics likewise fade from memories).  Perhaps an important 
percentage of our mental life similarly exists in an indeterminate 
state with experienced, but sketchy, perception-expectations.  
If we can accept this as a feature of cognition as such, it yields a 
natural framework for semantics.  Such semi-perceptual content 
serves as a "/staging area/" for intermediate-level concept-aggregates, 
like "/Mom's chocolate brownies/".  That idea is not complete in itself 
%-- it must be plugged as a unit into some larger context %-- 
but (arguably, at least) it gets encapsulated in a conceptual package, 
one that is neither fully abstract nor vividly perceptually explicit.

Syntactically, the word order seems fairly rigid.  This 
is hardly self-evident, because each word's contribution 
%-- "red" and "tin", say %-- feel unrelated.  Still, 
evidently there are cognitive trends in the mental 
"/staging area/" that yield a preference for 
building conceptual aggregates via certain formulae.  
Among adjectives, those declaring attributes that are 
more intrinsic to the nature of their substrata appear 
closer to the noun than qualities which are more 
incidental.  A metal box can be painted over, but will 
never become wooden.  Hence "/red/" slots in 
outside of "/tin/" ("/tin red box/" sounds wrong).  A color word binds more 
closely when it is more definitionally inherent 
to its vehicle ("t/red card/" in football, "/black belt/" 
in karate; these have situational salience, beyond mere 
sense-reports).  The distance from adjective to noun, 
in short, conveys data about how the former actually 
modifies.  Adjectives of compositional substance bind 
tightly in general, so "/tin/" logically precedes 
"/red/".  Such conventions evidently help given 
how adjectives play different roles in different 
contexts %-- affixing "/black/" inseparably to 
"/belt/" clarifies that the color, here, is not 
primarily a sensate quale but a constituent of an enumeration.

Phrases built around material objects thereby evidently 
pan outward from their minimal physical subtantiation 
to the ambient situational context, with word-order 
marking a parallel trajectory.  This is a syntactic 
principle in the sense that "/tin red box/" is ill-formed 
by virtue of word order, but of course we also 
need to mark phrasal boundaries: adjective-to-noun distance 
depends on */which/* noun.

Parts of speech, moreover, reflect how words play 
specific roles relative to aggregating concepts in 
(what I would call) a "t/semi-perceptual/" staging area.  
Noun phrases are de-facto landmarks in the synthesizing 
process, forming a conceptual nexus with some 
level of completeness and unity.  This surely reflects 
how sentences reconstruct perceptual orientation: 
in (), say, John and "/the stove/" represent two 
object-concepts which are inferred to stand as 
attentional foci for the speaker.  They serve 
as attractional zones, or foregrounds, absorbing 
awareness of other details and backgrounds 
(e.g., we perceive parts of the stove, its color, 
objects leaning against it, etc., as accompaniments 
to its holistic presentation rather than foreground 
foci in their own right).  Since linguistic structure
intuitively reconstructs perceptual organizations, 
it makes sense that noun-phrases are cognitive-staging 
milestones because their significands are cognitive-perceptual 
attractors.  

Type-theoretically, modeling some parts of speech as 
function-like "t/morphisms/" helps capture the 
interplay of stasis and dynamics that typifies 
cognitive "t/staging/".  Noun-like conceptual 
aggregates have a kind of holistic unity that becomes 
destabilized by added modifiers.  "/Tin box/", say, 
has a kind of statis as an idea, semi-image, or 
precursor to action; a statis disrupted by "/red/", but 
then via further processing the staged image settles 
back into a stable unity.  The formal construct 
of adjectives mapping nouns to nouns captures the 
surface-level manifestation of a churning cognitive 
underground, where intellectual labor is expended in  
forming, altering (by assimilating new detail), and 
re-establishing static precursor-images (in the sense of preparatory 
ideations for future action).  Similarly, propositions 
have a kind of situational statis (as mental targets, 
representations of states of affairs more than 
discrete objects, but still fixpoints within 
our construal of facts and affordances surrounding us 
%-- potentially in an anticipated future) which gets 
destabilized when subordinate clauses become nested into 
superordinates.

There are, of course, multiple protocols that could be used 
to model sentence structure.  Phrase-structure grammars emphasize 
nested hierarchies.  Dependency grammars focus more on 
inter-word relations (often among adjacent words, but crucial 
connections can exist between distant ones, such as from pronoun 
to antecedent, or subject to verb when a clause intervenes).  
Cognitively, we can emphasize the transformative effects 
of any single word on a conceptual synthesis established 
via preceding words, in a */logical/* ordering that 
deviates from the sequence of enunciation, though grammar 
determines how the latter maps to the former.  
Type theory is representative here because function-like 
words map one conceptual aggregate onto a transform, 
thereby establishing a precedence order.

To examine further, imagine a simple programming language that has 
only a few components: function symbols, string (character-sequence) 
and numeric literals, and "t/variable/" 
symbols that must be assigned a value before they are used. 
The most common structure in such a language would be (by analogy 
to real computer code) expressions consisting of a function 
symbol and one or more "t/arguments/".  The */interpreter/* 
that executes programs would essentially 
be a state machine, reading a sequence of symbols 
in turn.  There would be the following basic operations:

1)  If the current symbol is a numeric literal, convert it to an actual number 
(e.g., the text "m/16/" becomes the hexadecimal 0xF0).  
Convert string literals to arrays of glyph 
codes (e.g., in the Unicode UTF-16 format).  Place the current 
value on a program stack.

2)  If the current symbol is a variable, retrieve 
its current value from a global index.  Because every 
variable is initialized before use, we can assume that 
any value is ultimately obtained from source code 
as in (1), or read from an external source (such as a local file).
Again, place the current value on a program stack.

3)  If the current symbol is a function-symbol, identify 
which procedure is named by the symbol.  If we allow 
polymorphism %-- one name may reference multiple procedures, 
distinguished by their signatures %-- than this process 
requires examining the types of values further down the 
program stack.  Once the correct procedure is identified, 
transfer control to that procedure.  If implemented 
correctly, the procedure will take its imputs off the 
stack and push its own return values, which in turn 
will serve as imputs to later procedures.

For sake of discussion, I will call this a "t/push/transfer/" execution 
model, given the two main operations (pushing a value, or transferring 
control).  While this model is too simple for real computer 
languages, it serves as a useful case-study for real-world 
compilers.  Forth, one of the earliest high-level languages, 
had a structure pretty close to the one just outlined; and 
in practical terms most languages reveal a sequence of 
operations whose key structure reflects the protocol just described.  
  
Among the added complications relevant to a real-world push/transfer 
implementation are %-- first %-- resolving polymorphically 
"t/overloaded/" function symbols.  We can assume that the interpreter or compiler 
has access to a list mapping procedure names to a collection of signatures.  
Selecting a correct overload is straightforward if there is one exact 
signature-match given the current stack types.  However, most modern 
programming environments recognize type-casts where values of some types 
may be used as if a different type (e.g., any integer is implicitly also 
a decimal, with fractional part zero).  Moreover, modern languages commonly 
adopt template-metaprogramming and/or class-inheritance systems where 
a given variable-symbol could have multiple different types in different 
contexts.  In these systems, computing which overload matches a 
given sequence of parameter-values is considerably more complicated.

A second difficulty for push/transfer mechanics is deriving the correct 
sequence for presenting symbols to the "t/interpreter/" (in real life, said 
interpreter is more like an abtract representation guiding the compilation 
of high-level code into machine language, but we can still reason about source 
code as if it were interpreted on-the-fly).  Usually this sequence is 
different from the order in which tokens appear in source files, so symbols 
have to be reordered for push/transfer.  Compilers must also deduce which tokens 
are associated with which function-symbols, a process that involves 
both syntax (e.g., nested parentheses) and semantics (e.g., order of operands, 
such as multipliction before addition).  Parsing high-level code is therefore a 
matter of reducing source files (which have extra structures such as nested 
expressions) to a simpler representation based on token-sequences 
(such details as nesting become "t/flattened/" to a single list, which works 
because procedures enfoce a contract about how the program stack should be used). 

Despite its simplistic provenance, the "t/push/transfer/" execution model 
has some interesting resonance with natural language.  For one 
thing, the syntactic process just described %-- parsing more-complex 
code down to symbols arranged in a sequence ordered for push and transfer 
actions %-- has some schematic resemblance to the role of syntax 
in human language.  Moreover, semantic complexities such as 
function polymorphism recall phenomena such as multiple word-senses, 
where lexical units are, in effect, "t/overloaded/" with divergent 
meanings by context.  

Both computer code and natural language are, by many lights, 
better represented in terms of parse-graphs than trees 
(where certain relations, like anaphora in the latter context 
and side-effect propagation in the former, cut across tree-like 
directed branches).  With proper edge-filtering, tree "t/visiting/" 
algorithms can be adopted to parse graphs, including 
the "t/push/transfer/" execution model just mentioned.  
Type-checking may similarly be described as a graph-traversal 
strategy, where a "t/program stack/" is assigned types rather 
than values.  Assuming polymorphsm, 
a type-checker must confirm that, given any stack-state with a 
procedure symbol on top, there must be a unique implementation 
whose parameter-types match those symbolized lower on the stack 
(if so, its output type is then placed on the stack instead).  
Both type-checking and push/transfer may thereby be modeled 
as version of a generic graph-traversal pattern, whose 
central operations are crossing to unvisited child nodes; 
pushing leaf-nodes' values (or types, etc.) onto an 
external stack; and performing some external operation 
on non-leaf nodes once all descendent branches have been explored 
(in effect, navigating graphs with a state 
machine holding stack-memory and a trace of previously-seen nodes).

In short, whenever a directed graph models a computational 
process, we can extract a postordering of nodes 
representing the proper sequence for a push/transfer traversal.  
Likewise, we can type-check the relationship between 
child nodes and parent nodes, the latter being interpreted 
as procedures with a particular signature.  I believe 
parse-graphs in the context of computer languages are a 
useful case-study for human discourse in part because 
both of these operations %-- postordering and type-checking 
%-- have foundational correlates in natural language.  
In particular, the mapping of a general parse-graph onto 
a postorder traversal sequence captures, in formal terms, 
the underlying machinery of "t/conceptual synthesis/" 
according to a well-defined order.  
We can treat nouns as akin to 
"t/values" pushed onto a */conceptual/* stack, 
whereas verbs, adjectives, and other modifiers 
embody cognitive transforms applied to concepts 
currently residing on this "t/stack/" 
(which in this context is mostly metaphorical).  
Given this conceptual background, I will adopt the 
phrase "t/staging order/" as the linguistic 
equivalent to computational "t/push/transfer/" order. 

Type-checking and postordering are "t/functionalizable/" 
similarities between natural and programming languages 
%-- whetever the metaphysical differences between how 
they are realized, the two domains have some 
functional structures in common.  By analogy, 
human and computer vision share capabilities 
whose functional roles in larger processing "t/modules/" 
can be analyzed.  Image-analysis tactics such as texture 
segmentation, occlusion compensation, and gradient-vector inference 
have detailed mathematical formulae that may offer functional insights into 
visual perception (even if computer implementations may 
be very different from brains').  Type-checking and postordering are 
not at the same level of quantitative sophistication, 
so we have not necessarily moved a theoretical needle very far 
by detecting structural analogies between graph-traversal 
postorder and cognitive "t/staging/".  With that said, 
I believe these analogies yield a formal model of 
syntax/semantics interface that is more cognitively realistic 
than Bolt `etal;'s appeal to commutative diagrams.  

More substantially, postordering is not just a heuristic 
for revisiting parse graphs; type reduction and 
conceptual-synthesis conventions act as constraints 
*/on/* parse-graphs to begin with.  Most sentences give rise 
to many minimally plausible graphs.  Even when excluding 
unrelated contexts like the family name, for instance, the 
word "m/trump/" in a playing-card context can serve as noun, 
verb, adjective, and even adverb.  The distribution of a 
single word-sense over multiple parts of speech is more a 
norm than an exception.  This fact in itself yields a proliferation 
of plausible parse-graphs, even before addressing polysemy and 
phrase-boundary ambiguities.  From many */plausible/* candidates, 
the set of */correct/* parse graphs are those that meet 
criteria of coherence, some of which can be modeled in terms 
of graph-traversal protocols.  
Such processes are apparently interdependent, in that (for example) 
part-of-speech assignment influences phrase nesting and vice-versa.  
Language would be more computationally tractable if we could 
present processing algorithms in a logical order, with the 
results of earlier ones available to later.  In reality, 
it seems as if our minds subconsciously test out many 
initial-condition sets for traversals (e.g., multiple ways 
of construing part of speech) and converge on best solutions 
(e.g., parts of speech and phrase boundaries 
being mutually consistent, without deriving the former first, 
or vice-versa).  Conceptual synthesis and "t/staging/" are 
surely part of this process insofar as assessments of meaningfulness, on the 
one hand, and well-formedness (on syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic criteria) 
on the other, coexist in a kind of feedback loop, converging on the most plausible 
construals in all domains (syntax, semantics, pragmatics, and conceptualization).     
   
Earlier I argued that syntactic theory should not just 
observe a language's rules, but also explain why 
they retain their force despite communication's 
inherenly anarchic nature.  Here we make progress, 
I believe, if there is a distinct cognitive resonance 
for a specific word-order vis-a-vis conceptual synthesis.  
If hearing */red/* before */tin/* simplifies the 
translation of surface discourse to a staged 
cognitive image %-- compared to the inverse %-- then speakers 
would be motivated to adopt that convention for sake of 
most organically translating their own cognitive attitudes 
into verbal form, as well as dialogic efficiency.  
Following Langacker [], I implied that we place adjectives closest 
to the noun if they are most intractible as attributes. 
Thus even color is a less essential quality than 
compositional substance (glass, wood, metal).  
These "t/staging/" conventions for word-order, then, 
can be considered an essential foundation for synax; 
other syntactic principles, such as norms 
affecting phrase boundaries and inter-word 
relationships, might be said to derive their 
consistency from the role they play in enforcing 
cognitively salient word order (which includes break 
strings of lexemes into clauses, insofar as the phrase 
to which a word belongs determines its traversal-postorder 
position). 

Functional analogies between programming and natural 
language %-- how syntax guides translation of 
surface-level artifacts to parse graphs that yield 
postorder and type-checking traversals %-- are 
one way to summarize the systematic properties 
of language use; in other words, spoken 
language is a vehicle for communicating content 
whose underlying form may be represented 
via parse-graphs together with traversal actions.   
This interpretation 
of parse-graphs works by analogy to 
(but also in place of) set-theoretic or (say) modal-logic 
approaches, where languages are treated as a surface-level 
manifestation of concept-aggregates with meanings 
governed by logico-mathematical rules 
%-- at least when reduced to their formal essence.  A key difference, 
however, is that within "t/transfer of control/" the space 
of available functions is not restricted to those explicitly 
implemented in high-level code.  Operating systems, 
language runtimes, standard libraries, and other 
pre-compiled functions are all available for use by new 
code.  These would be analogous to extra-linguistic 
cognitive competence that may be solicited by constructions 
in discourse: conceptual transformations' staging-order position 
may be established by syntactic and 
semantic means, but their cognitive effects need not be 
modeled solely in semantic or pragmatic terms.   

I intend to propose these ideas as a foundation for 
grounding syntactic theory on cognitive optimization 
%-- and, by extension, situating the theory's overall 
series of disciplinary warrants against the paradigms 
of phenomenology.  However, I feel there are two 
issues to address that could complicate the picture I've outlined.

// ///

First, my discussion has implied that word-order and associated 
sentence properties, such as phrase-structure, is logically 
fixed.  That may be true in some sentences, but one might find 
counter-examples.  I will examine the following:

()  I'm heading out to the store.

As I see it, there are two ways to read this sentence, and they imply phrasal 
and staging-order differencs.  We can reading "/heading out/" as a compound 
verb, or we can treat "/out/", instead, as part of a clause describing 
direction of movement.  That both are feasible may be demonstrated by 
question-and-answer forms:

()  Where are you going?  Out to the store.
()  What are you doing?  Heading out.

Movement verbs reference spatial trajectories, but these are 
defined by more than just start and end points.  A path 
"/to the store/" has a functionally distinct early part in leaving 
the building, to which () alludes via "/out/".  At the same time, 
the process has dimensions beyond just spatial movement; going 
*/out/* typically involves grabbing one's keys, wallet, phone, etc.  
In short, the presence of */out/* results in () referring to 
the speaker's planned actions with extra detail both vis-a-vis the 
path trajectory and the operational components.  Either of these 
semantic effects are triggered by attaching "/out/" to a word 
or phrase %-- but a given parse will draw the phrasal boundaries 
one place or another, and thereby model only one part of the word's role.

I would address this issue by arguing that parse-graphs are provisional: 
diagramming one version that is appropriate for a sentence does not 
preclude others working as well.  The actual syntactic forms that 
influence sentences' reception may serve as a superposition 
of multiple different phrase-nesting schemes.  Since "/out/" 
in () is stated both immediately after "/heading/" and before 
"/to the store/" we can, while hearing (), process "/out/" 
simultaneously as influencing our interpretation of the 
prior word and the following clause.  A parse-graph represents 
how we experience certain words as implying a modification of 
some intermediate aggregate (what I've called "/staging/"), 
particularly if we allow edge-annotations to notate where 
words have that "h/restaging/" effect, and the effect's targets.  
In this sense parse-graphs are cognitively motivated, 
but such does not preclude a sentence from yielding several 
distinct motivated graphs.  If we believe syntax should 
provide one definitive construction representing sentences' 
"t/deep structure", then we can take the unit of exposition 
as (at least potentially) a superposition of multiple graphs rather 
than one single structure.

So, in short, two different parse-graphs %-- one wherein "/out/" attaches 
to "/heading/" to yield a verb-phrase, and one where the same word 
attached to "/to the store/" to provide a direct object %-- are both 
correct, but neither is complete.  The "t/definitive/" parsing 
structure for () would be a superposition of the two provisional graphs.

The second issue I'd like to address is the extent of complete phrase- 
(and sentence-) level scale in contrast to word-pairs.  
My schematic proposal is that individual words contribute 
cognitive "/restaging/" of aggregates formed from logically 
prior words.  From a given conceptual synthesis, we 
interpret a given succedent word as adding detail or 
variation, wherein the synthesis re-stabilizes into 
a new unity by assimilating the new content.  
In broad outline, the process is not unlike 
how scientific theories adapt to accommodate new 
empirical data, though on a smaller scale.

Such an analysis might work fine on mostly 
local levels, e.g., adjectives, adverbs, relative 
pronouns, determiners, and so forth, but require 
further clarification for verbs (and perhaps conjunctions, 
subordinators, etc.).  In the case of verbs, a 
"h/local/" analysis could accommodate intransitives, 
but not subject/object (and possibly indirect object) 
tuples.  Type-theoretically, a (di)transitive verb 
needs multiple nominal constructs in place to 
yield a proposition-like synthesis.  Moreover, 
verbs might command multiple clauses governed 
by various case-forms: locative constructions, 
benefactive, instrumentive, etc., each marking 
that an associated phrase presents some detail 
(the where, why, how) for the central verb 
in the immediate surrounding phrase (possibly, the whole sentence).

In the realm of conceptual synthesis, that is, verbs 
function uniquely: they don't alter a single aggregate so 
much as collate a collection of distinct nouns 
(or noun-phrases), using a roster of thematic relations, 
in particular %-- the sorts of connections marked 
by declension, for relevant languages %-- to organize 
the significatory role of different constituents.  
A sentence, in general, accrues various kinds of detail 
related to its central verb.  Some of these 
would appear to be intrinsic to the verb's meaning; some, less 
so.  Given */donate/*, for example, it seems necessary 
to indicate (perhaps by implicit context) a giver, a gift, 
and a recipient:

()  Last weekend we donated a hundred dollars to the animal shelter.

Here, the indicator of */when/* (viz., "/last weekend/") is subsidiary, adding merely a tangential 
factoid to the overall sentence, but the other components are 
mandatory given the relevant sense of "/donate/".  A verb's 
"t/theta grid/" models elements that are sufficiently 
intrinsic that special grammatic forms embed them concisely, 
as in 

()  We gave the animal shelter a hundred dollars 

However, indirect objects may be ineliminable for a completed idea while 
also resistant to the tranform whereby a clause headed 
by */to/* moves before the direct object, dropping the preposition.
It is not clear why the abridged indirect-object form is acceptable 
with some English verbs and not others.  Be that as it may, 
verb "t/details/" exist on multiple levels of essentiality, 
from a core subject/object nexus (spanned by theta grids) to 
essential and then eliminable thematic relations, plus potential marginal 
emendations (like when something happened, or further elaboration 
on motives or context).  Verbs have implicit 
"h/slots/" for such variegated thematic roles, and by observing 
the particular slot slated for a given word (via theta formations) 
or phrases (via case-marking; particularly, in English, leading 
propositions) we identify the intended role for the constituent.

In presenting conceptual syntheses, then, verbs operate via structures 
of roles rather than singular re-staging.  We can still say that a 
given cognitive staging is intrinsic to inferred meaning; the point 
here is that verbs effectuate such processes on a larger scale, 
spanning the breadth of a phrase or sentence, whereas other 
parts of speech (e.g., adjectives) operate more locally.  
A theory of cognitive staging can cover both cases if it 
models thematic roles and relations.  In type-theoretic 
terms, that structural enhancement would be akin to 
enlarging the scope of lambda-expressions to cover not just a 
function with a tuple of parameters, but parameter-packs that 
are indexed via distinct role-attributions for each argument.  
Insofar as verb-constructions are broken down into roles 
occupied by individual nouns or noun-phrases, we can still 
discuss the cognitive phenomenon of a single word 
acting in relation to a prior aggregate; the difference 
for verbs is that we need to describe */which/* thematic 
role governs how the verb is oriented to the concept that 
it transforms.  The conceptual pairing of a verb to a 
locative phrase, for example, would be different than the 
same phrase (perhaps swapping out the preposition for another) figured 
as indirect object, or genitive, or so on.

Systems of thematic relations establish a kind of two-tiered 
dimension of sentence structure: the set of words and phrases that 
add detail for a central verb provides sentences' inner skeleton, 
whereas adjectives and other "t/localized" modifiers form 
a peripheral epitope (so to speak).  Conceptually, the 
central skeleton's multi-part nature means that cognitive 
integration must synthesize multiple components, in contrast to a 
single re-staging such as "m/diamond/" vis-a-vis "m/wedding ring/".  
To put it differently, the underlying intellectual phenomenon 
is less about a single concept acting on a provisional image-aggregate 
(as */diamond/* acts upon */wedding ring/*, 
or */red/* upon */tin box/*) so much as a verb, in conjunction with 
multiple thematically related details, setting forth the principal 
data of situations or states of affairs.  Whereas semantics 
on the localizable "/periphery/" appears to tap into a 
cognitive faculty of schematic planning and proto-images, 
the meaningfulness of the "t/central/" structure reflects a 
more holistic, situational cognitive repertoire. 

We can also say that the veins of a sentence's thematic skeleton 
provide multiple sites for speaker-relative grounding: for 
each person's discource to encode their particular epistemic 
orientation and perspectival vantage.  Such details may 
be manifest temporally (e.g., via choice of verb tense/aspect), 
spatially (via locative constructions and deictics), perceptually 
(through, say, figure/ground, single/plural, mass/count, and landmark/trajector pairings), 
or in terms of "/narrative construal/" from an evidential 
standpoint (I argued earlier how rhetorical patterns 
imply evidential narratives even if these are not marked 
directly on a morphological scale) or local qualities, such as 
verb-aspect.  Not to imply that this list is exhaustive;   
modeling all modes of speaker-relative grounding requires a detailed 
theory in its own right.  Here I simply want to observe that 
such grounding is holistic in the sense that it encompasses 
a central verb (profiling some event, state, or process) as well as 
the set of noun-concepts or -foci that participate therein.  
The central skeleton that pulls together multiple thematic 
relata likewise consolidates multiple sites for speaker 
grounding/epistemics, allowing listeners to piece together 
a provenance for speakers' expressed beliefs.

// ///

From a formal perspective, thematic relations suggest a 
form of typed lambda calculus wherein functions act on a 
tuple of values indexed not by sequence, but instead by 
assigning distinct roles to each argument.  
In terms of computer code, that sort of calling convention 
%-- concretized in some programming languages via 
"t/labeled/" or "t/keyword/" parameters %-- is arguably 
more natural than the alternative (i.e., "t/positional/" 
arguments) because each value, passed in to a procedure, 
typically has a distinct role, possibly suggested by the 
name it is assigned in the function's implementation 
block.  In a natural-language context, the particular 
thematic relation that connects a subsidiary clause to the 
central verb determines how we infer its meaning 
(or, more precisely, its contribution to the larger meaning overall).  

Formal treatment of "t/roles/" may be outside the typical 
scope of lambda calculi (or other models of computational 
processes), but there are similar ideas in theories of 
hypergraph databases and other knowledge-modeling contexts.  
A multi-part relation (schematically a hyperedge, when 
expressing data via labeled graphs) often assigns specific roles 
to each participant; e.g., a */divorce/* implies two individuals, 
a prior situation of marriage, and some legal entity or 
context which recognizes the divorce as binding.  
A binary relation such that one party is */divorced from/* 
another thereby implies the presence of further participants 
(so treating this relation as merely binary excludes constitutive 
details).  

Unlike a hyperedge in a knowledge database, calling a procedure 
does not assert a statement of fact but rather evaluates to a computed 
result, which value might then be used in some larger or future expression.  
However, there are some commonalities between sets of interrelated 
software procedures (e.g., code libraries) and graph databases, 
which could potentially serve as a formal inspiration for theories 
of human cognition.  Conceptual integration is in some sense an 
intellectual procedure %-- a "t/computation/" in the domain 
of conceptual staging and proto-images, if we don't take the mind/machine 
metaphor too literally %-- and language-users deploy background knowledge 
to "h/execute/" such scripts in ways consistent with their peers.  
Frameworks such as the "t/interface theory of meaning/" developed 
by Orlin Vakarelov suggest ways these intuitions could be productively 
fleshed out.  By analogy to how lexicons codify a space of linguistic 
knowledge %-- speakers are acquainted with the concepts associated to thousands of 
words in their native tongue %-- we likewise have (and acquire) a 
dictionary of mental "t/scripts/" guiding how concepts are to be 
merged (e.g., a recurring gestalt pairs an object with its 
constitutive material, such as "/tin box/", or its manner of appearance, 
such as "/red box/").  In many cases these semanticized scripts derive 
from analogous scripts in social, collective life: "x/menu/", "x/waiter/", and 
"x/restaurant/" belong to a semantic frame that regulates one form 
of social activity.  Knowledge of what to do when visiting a 
sit-down eatery is coiled together with knowing what words like "/menu/" 
mean.  

Such examples motivate theories wherein language-users are 
also, on a broader scale, competent members of a society, who 
have learned certain norms and rituals.  Enculturated 
knowledge acts by analogy to precompiled code libaries offerred 
by a computer operating system, for example, from which source code 
may "h/solicit/" a particular function as needed (e.g., opening 
a file).  Language, by analogy, defers to a social repertoire of 
enactive scripts, and words often acquire their context-specific 
meaning by triggering associations %-- or hypothetical 
situations %-- grounded in social-pragmatic schemas.  For instance, 
a proper definition for the word "t/menu/" should %-- rather than 
trying to exhaustively circumscribe the menu-concept via 
logical or set-theoretic machinery %-- simply recognize that 
anyone who understands the restaurant "t/domain/", as a nexus 
of social practice, recognizes that the process includes 
selecting items off a menu.  Presumably speakers rarely talk about 
menus anyhow outside that dining/ordering context; so proper use 
of the word is simply one part of competent social participation.  
More than anything, this is what the word means %-- not so 
much its contribution to criteria for what makes a statement true, 
but what makes it correct to use this word in a given social setting.  
Metaphorical uses also exist (the idiom "m/not on the menu/" 
extends beyond food), but that is merely one of inumerable examples 
of metaphoric word-sense that abstract from concrete 
"/socialized/" usage properly modeled via something like an 
"t/interface theory/" of meaning.

// /// 
      
The premise that individual words conceptually modify logically 
precedent aggregates may seem underwhelming, as a foundation 
for nontrivial further theory.  But I want to extend that 
perhaps obvious starting point with three further arguments.

First, I claim that this overall phenomenon can be taken as a 
groundwork for syntactic theory to begin with.  
When interpreting a sentence, we need to queue up words 
in a well-determined order, each acting as a 
kind of conceptual transform applied to 
syntheses borne from precedent words.  To sequence 
which word comes on the stage, when, demands a 
rigorous set of phrase-bounding and morphosyntactic 
conventions, which emerge organically in 
language in the form of syntactic rules.  
In large part, I believe, conventions in grammar 
acquire rule-like status (without any central authority)  
in light of processing demands for aligning "t/staging/" 
word-order to optimal cognitive construal of conceptual 
aggregates.  So such word-order is not just a feature 
*/of/* syntax; it is a causative foundation */for/* syntax.

Second, verbs are distinct in that conceptual synthesis here 
requires contributions via numerous thematic relations.  
This formulation generalizes the more "t/local/" phenomenon 
of one concept modifying another, to a more holistic 
realm where syntheses need to be molded against situational 
and enactive templates.  Meanwhile, the expansion of conceptual 
synthesis into a multi-themed roster expands the plurality of sites 
where speakers express epistemically-inflected content.  
Any locative construction, for example, because it will assert a 
spatial path and/or place (or set of places), is invested with 
speaker's orientation to the spatial framework of the discourse.  
How does the speaker see, imagine, know about these spaces?  
Listeners instinctively reconstruct details of the speaker's 
belief-forming perspective because they have to recreate 
for themselves the pattern of grounding expressed in a sentence.  
For example, in "m/John spilled water/" the person is grounded as 
focus of perceptual orientation and as an active agent.  Meanwhile, 
rhetorically, he is grounded as a noun and a verb-subject.  
Processing the latter, listeners inevitably reconstruct 
the former (cognitive) orientation.  
Because discursive structure has parameters that replicate 
perceptual comportment, we constantly receive other's communications 
as saturated with their particular epistemic attitudes.  
(Speaker-relative epistemics is not some adjunct that we only 
entertain explicitly when a speaker's authority is in question, 
say, or when there is disagreement.  Instead, synchronizing 
cognitive disposition is woven tightly with miminal 
facts of language constituents, such as parts of speech).

Taking the first two points in combination, such arguments 
suggest priorities for syntactic theory: in particular, modeling 
the ordering rules such that structural patterns in syntax map 
to a sequential order of words seen as effects in a realm of 
cognitive staging %-- i.e., the natural analog to postordering 
parse-graphs in computational languages; and modeling the gradations of 
thematic relations' centrality, between the mandatory theta 
grid on the one hand, and marginal factoids on the other.  
Representations of sentence structure %-- dependency grammar, 
x-bar, and so forth %-- 
should be assessed based on how rigorously they document 
these syntactic phenomenon in particular. 

Third, given the accretionary nature of conceptual synthesis, 
any theory of meaning must address the intermediate 
aggregates: those in between lexical word-meanings and sentence-level 
propositions.  To the degree that we use formal models, 
they should be explanatory rather than circular.  
The idea "/red box/" obviously intersects the 
concepts */box/* and */red/*.  If we then analyze this 
signification as, say, the set of things that are both 
red and boxes, then such a construction might be 
theoretical progress if we had some literal engineering 
whereby words reference sets.  However, if we accept set-theoretic 
language in just a metaphoric way, describing 
"/red box/" as the intersection `redbox; merely restates what 
should be analyzed.

Bolt `etal;, mentioned earlier, propose Conceptual Space theory 
as an alternative to symbolic logic, for modeling 
aggregates like "/red/" plus "/box/".  To the extent that 
our overall conceptual worlds may be represented via 
quasi-mathematical operations, then aggregative meanings 
can be seen as functors between Categories of grammatic 
formations and of multi-part conceptual units, respectively  
(composition operators on a purely syntactic level, 
and conceptual syntheses on a signifactory plane, 
being mutually commutative in the sense of 
commutative diagrams).  Unfortunately, I am not 
convinced that there is any logico-mathematical 
formulation that models conceptual 
synthesis in any general case.  The meaningfulness 
of intermediate conceptual aggregates, from my 
perspective, depends on some sort of 
"t/cognitive staging/" and the use of partially-formed 
perceptual images as precursors to purposeful action.  
I suggest that, almost always, such intermediaries 
depend on extralinguistic cognitive engagement.

There is certainly a role for semantic theories: 
many patterns of meaning have a recurring structure 
that doubtless guides cognitive schemata, 
such as the mass/count distinction within modes 
of plurality/multiplicity (and others listed earlier: 
singular/plural, figure/ground, landmark/trajector).   
For another example, alongside type-theoretic 
grammar, there is a branch of type-theoretic 
*/semantics/* which highlights the partition 
of our discursive domains into, in effect, 
distinct "t/ontological regions/", such as 
physical objects, living things, sentient 
beings, rational agents.  The superposition of 
multiple such regions gives conceptual structure 
to sentences about referents that exist in multiple strata:

()  That newspaper [ponting to a table] just moved to 10th street 
and laid off half its staff

()  I recommend you print out this book from the PDF link

Also, apparent region violations drive many functional metaphors:

()  These flowers really want some sunshine
()  This drought has left the soil parched
()  The spell-checker thinks "/hooman/" isn't a word.  

Examples such as () through () have been analyzed in terms of 
type coercions, dependent types, and other structures 
recognized within mathematical type theory (and 
formalized within the semantics of computer programming languages).

These are options for formal semantics that have, I contend, 
explanatory merit vis-a-vis natural language, but they describe 
constraints on cognitive processing more than end-to-end 
algorithms for constructing signified meanings.  
They do not, in my opinion, substitute for a cognitive 
model of intermediate staging, that is necessary 
to bridge lexical word-sense with full-phrase propositional content.

To be sure, I have offerred rather inchoate characterization 
of this "/staging/".  The space of mid-level conceptual 
aggregates belongs neither to a realm of abstract reasoning nor 
in-the-moment sensate perception, so it may be difficult to 
analyze without special-purpose vocabulary and paradigms.  
Whatever their details, I believe such theories' central 
concerns will be */extra/*-linguistic.  This is not a kind 
of */limited/* contextual detour, where resolving 
ambiguities such as "/bat/" (animal or wooden instrument) depends on 
societal background knowledge.  Since conceptual syntheses are 
reshuffled with almost every word, we are  
invoking "t/staging/" faculties at almost every  
step, such that sentence-understanding is intrinsically a 
process that swings back and forth between 
extra-linguistic and syntactic/semantic/pragmatic inference.

// //  Conclusion

Against this backdrop, I think I can more rigorously 
defend my earlier-stated objection to the 
idea (explicit or not) that sentences signify propositions.  
Discourse may indeed */communicate/* beliefs, 
but that phenomenon emerges from a multifaceted 
process integrating both linguistic and extra-linguistic 
ideations.  We cannot account for proposition-like 
meanings */within the affordances/* of syntax, semantics, 
or pragmatics alone, at least without widening the scope 
of one or more of these to an extent that is not explanatorily 
productive.

Holding, in our minds, semi-complete precursor images of 
future or hypothetical objects, surroundings, and 
situations is an intrinsic part of rational agenthood.  
During talk, we exploit these capabilities 
to syncronize behavior among two or more people, 
leveraging future-oriented cognitive routines even 
when the focus of our discourse exists in the immediate 
presence.  Cooperation between multiple individuals engenders  
abstracting demands %-- refactoring perceptual experience 
into propositional/enactive schemata %-- analogous to 
the distancing effects of future-planning.  

Certainly, purposeful action coordinated among several people requires 
each to know (and, in general, share) each other's beliefs, 
so communicating what we deem factual is an important part of 
discourse.  Expressing not just */what/* we believe, but */why/*, 
is relevant because we want others to hear our rationales.  
Given these requirements, it is inevitable that human 
language evolved structures within almost every sentence 
to express one or more beliefs %-- either as assertions that 
are the sentence's point or preambles to some further 
comment, suggestion or request %-- and moreover 
encode speaker-relative perspectives and foreknowledge that 
clarify their origins.  This epistemics-oriented disclosure 
emerges from the overall regime of cognitive linguistic 
processing.

But we should not conclude from such notions that 
sentences */signify/* propositions %-- i.e., that there 
is a series of formal rules governing a mostly 
determinative process through which a signifying process, 
existing on a minimal level in the mapping of lexemes 
to word-sense, propagates outward to predicate 
structure, in a logical or mechanical fashion.  
Paraphrases such as "/red box/" as the set-theoretic 
intersection of "/redness/" and "/boxness/" may 
create the illusion that the transformative 
effects of one word on a priorly-processed aggregate 
can be modeled via formal systems.  However, such 
formalization, I contend, will be either circular 
(explaining not much, in the end) or oversimplistic 
(explaining only cherry-picked linguistic artifacts, 
not typical usages and utterances).  To the degree 
that cognitive transforms and "t/staging/" are 
amenable to rigorous analysis, such analysis 
would have to be grounded in an overarching 
cognitive science.

Formal syntax has a notion of sentences being "t/grammatically well formed/" 
(depending on which grammar applies, of course) because we can give 
mechanical algorithms for testing when a string of words may, or may not, 
be derived via production rules.  Whatever actual philosophy is in play, 
formal semantics often seems to */want/* semantics to follow a 
similar mechanizable protocol; e.g., we can imagine testing whether a 
particular conceptual synthesis is "t/well formed/" by 
consulting an enumeration of concept-formation rules.  The purported 
"m/married bachelor/", say, would be ill-formed.  By contrast, however, 
I actually believe "m/married bachelor/" names a reasonable concept, in the 
sense that most people would infer its intension (in the sense of an 
intensionality/extensionality contrast).  More broadly, building 
models of algorithmic conceptual synthesis would allow the comparably 
algorithmic notion of grammatic production to map onto the semantic 
plance, as anticipated by Bolt `etal;: syntactic and semantic syntheses 
commuting like Categorial diagrams, with both atomic and complex functors 
between syntax and sematics (the "/atomic/" being lexical word-sense).  
My arguments in this paper are that such an overly-tidy picture is 
untenable.  Concepts simply don't synthesize according to 
"t/production rules/" analogous to BNF grammar.  Such grammar may 
be overly simplistic vis-a-vis natural language, but at least 
formal syntactic theory has some usefulness in relation to syntax, 
which is more rigid than word-meaning.  But the semantic plane, 
more so than the syntactic, cannot be rigorously studied 
without a deeply cognitive model of concept-aggregation.

Programming language semantics is concerned with the binding 
of values to symbols --- when those "t/markings/" start and 
cease to be apppropriate --- as well as polymorphic 
definition of multiple procedures with the same symbol
but different parameter types, and other type-related 
concerns.  Code */syntax/* addresses such issues as 
expression boundaries and "t/sequence points/", indicating 
which values are parameters for which function-calles as 
well as, potentially, the order of procedures' side-effects 
(particularly when a prior effect could be "t/visible/" to 
a future subroutine).  In simple terms, source code 
can be modeled via a "t/program stack/", but syntactic and 
semantic systems are necessary to ensure that high-level code 
maps to an executable stack-representation while ensuring that 
all procedures' type and precondition contracts are guaranteed.
Note that the algorithmetized syntax and semantics here 
serve as */preparation/* for function-calls, many of which 
may be to precompiled routines whose implementations are 
opaque to the high-level compiler and runtime.  I find this 
roughly analogous to the role of syntax and semantics 
in natural language, which bridge discourse to cognitive 
operations even if the cognitive processing itself 
is opaque to linguistic analysis */per se/*. 

This exposition might be a little straw-man-like in that Bolt `etal;, 
for example, do not specifically work from a system of grammatical 
productions.  Their syntactic theory is more about, starting 
from any given sentence, retracing the compositional principles 
that build up a complex network from isolated word-pairs.  
We aren't "t/producing/" (or, for that matter, "t/testing/") sentences 
so much as retracing their unifying formulae.  But still, 
any analysis wherein the conceptual synthesis will algorithmically 
reciprocate a syntactic composition-pattern %-- thereby 
creating complex meanings %-- implicitly invokes a 
principle of conceptual production.  Either we view such 
production as inherently cognitive and extralinguistic, which is 
my approach, or we must articulate rules for how concepts 
in their totality form a logical system, wherein all concepts are 
built up from primitive roots by operations such as 
those of set theory (union, intersection, disjoint union, etc.) 
or other formalizations (modal logic, the logic of quantifiers, and so on).   
Referring back to my reading of the successive syntheses 
connoted by "/in this red tin box/", I don't believe 
*/any/* of those transforms can be glossed in such logical terms.  
Put aphoristically, linguistic formalization should model 
%-- perhaps with the aid of computational analogs %-- processes 
through which surface-level discourse is mapped to a sequence 
of cognitive transforms presented to a extra-linguistic 
rational faculties.  This is different from attempting 
to model concept-synthesis, as a kind of cognitive process, 
directly.  As a useful analogy, programmers do not need to 
study how system-kernel procedures are implemented; they merely 
need to know the type-signatures and preconditions for calling them. 

I have also argued that any cognitive 
science, to be comprehensive, has to work 
with cognition as lived by flesh-and-blood 
people in social, embodied, personalistic life-worlds.  
Such an approach would be only tangentially a 
*/natural/* science %-- the physicalistic 
intuitions that lend systematicity and 
disputative structure to studies of nature 
would, in this context, dilute rather than 
guarantee explanatory rigor.  I have proposed 
phenomenology as an alternative foundation, 
so %-- on this architecture %-- theories 
of cognitive-semantic "t/staging/" 
would be formulated on phenomenological 
grounds.  Thus semantics would have a 
kind of theoretical dependence 
on cognitive phenomenology, and 
syntax on semantics in the sense 
that phrase-structure rules become entrenched 
by virtue of conceptual demands on word-order.  So cognitive 
phenomenology can stand as a foundation 
that supports the multiple facets of the 
linguistics project, even if it 
lies outside the proper scope of that 
discipline.  This is consistent with a 
philosophy wherein cognitive 
phenomenology provides an explanatory 
scaffold for */all/* humanities.


  
    

 


 


merge 1 and 2 points 



   


 


 



 
 


  
  
    

At any given stage in this process, syntax clarifies which 
words belong to the conceptual aggregate targeted for 
re-staging, as well as which word acts as a modifier, 
for this specific step in intermediate processing.  
 
 








 
 
 
  

     




       




(imagine: "/There's a mathematician in Poland who claims he's 
proved the Reimann hypothesis about zeta zeros/").     






 
   
  

    
















Bats flying towards the stands are a risk to cameramen
Last year I photographed bats hanging from a ledge in this case












 
  

    

 
        
      

  


  
    





Kowalewski addresses what is sometimes called the "t/demarcation problem/" %-- defending 
linguistics as a legitimate science, not pseudoscience (astrology, say) %-- and moreover 
the version of that problem relevant to linguistics based on constructed examples, 
in contrast to more empirical/quantitative methods, such as corpus analysis, or the measurable 
performance of AI agents designed according to computational linguistics principles.
 
  
    

 

   


the .... of 


a form 
of cognitive phenomenology being     
          








Computer software which merely replicates 
these visual workflows cannot be said to emulate human 
intelligence 
   
     
  


 
  
 
 
   




  before selecting a course of action %--  



In particular, it is an intrinsic 


  

  


    
cau  


  

     
      


    

 

   

   

   

 


[https://www.ling.uni-stuttgart.de/institut/ilg/team/Dateien/Quantifier_Scope_Ambiguities.pdf]

<<

every band performed three songs
everyone sang along to one song or another





 is not prima facie self-evident (like 
laws of logic) 




any methodology 
based on formal descriptions needs both to explain why observed patterns exist   







describing formalizable 
patterns that */do/* exist in (any particular) language is neither necessary nor 
sufficient for a theoretically useful exposition.  
